Hi everyone and welcome to our college and in today's session, we are going to understand in depth what exactly is CICD, which is Continuous Integration Continuous Delivery, which is a core concept of DevOps. Along with this, we will also understand why do we need CICD and what are the different tools in the industry to implement it. First of all, let's understand in detail what CICD exactly is. It stands for Continuous Integration Continuous Delivery. But these are our technical words. What exactly does that mean in a practical sense? For that, we will take a common example of an e-commerce application. Let's suppose we work in an organization and there are many other developers with us who are working on a single application, which is an e-commerce application. It is not that any scalable application is being built in a good company, it will be built in one go. Over time, we will have to make many changes in that application. They can be our bug fixes, they can be our new feature implementations. As soon as we implement a new feature, we will have to write code for it. We will merge that code with the existing code base, test it and then deploy it. Over time, there are new changes in any application that keep happening. Now all of these changes go through something called the software development lifecycle. And in a software development lifecycle, there are some important steps in which CICD is involved. let's understand that when we build any application and make new changes in it, what exactly are we doing? First of all, our job is to develop any feature that we have. Once we have developed it, we are going to commit and push the changes onto our own branch. Generally, any organization has a main branch that is running and all the developers commit changes in their own branches. And after one point, they integrate their own branch changes with the main branch. Similarly, all the developers merge their changes into the main branch. this is usually what happens when we are using a version control system Git. once we have committed and pushed the changes, then comes our build stage. Build stage is building deployable artifacts from the application code. the source code of the application, plus we include dependencies and libraries in it. we create a deployable artifact of the code, which are called the build files. In the build file, we get our binary files, our executable files. It is very similar to saying that if we are building an Android application, then we have to go to the last and create .apk. After the build, we generally test our application. There are many tests included in testing. The simplest of them are our unit tests, which are generally done by developers. After unit testing, we do integration testing to check that our different components are working properly. Along with that, we also have regression testing, which we check that with new changes, our old functionalities are working properly. this way we have different steps. And once we have tested our application, we generally go to the release step. Release means making the entire application available to the end users to use it. Now there is an important step in the release step, which is called deploying the application. Deployment means making any application, any code, any software available in a particular environment. Generally, in any good organization, different deployment environments exist. For example, in any organization, there are mainly three environments. One is our dev, which is the development environment. One is our staging environment. One is our prod, which is the production environment. In the dev environment, the application is only for developers. On the prod, it is for all the end users. Staging environment is the pre-production environment. In the team, we want to give a demo to a manager or a CTO of how the application is working. there we can deploy the application on the staging first. And when everything is working properly, the manager will give us approval. after that, we can deploy it at the production level. In fact, there are some tests for a particular application that can be performed only after it is deployed. For example, when we do end-to-end testing, we have security tests, smoke tests, and there are alpha and beta tests. All these tests are done only after the application is deployed in a particular environment. Generally, in test code, depending upon the organization, we perform the test after the test is deployed in the staging or prod environment. this entire process is how we make any changes to the existing code base, to the existing application. Before CICD, in the early days of software development, the whole process was manual. And whenever something becomes manual in software development, there are many errors. Because when there are humans, they tend to create errors. there will be many errors, plus this entire process will be very time consuming. Because in every application, when any new change comes, then when we test it again, then all the old tests will have to be re-performed by any human. this was not a very good way to build products. And when we talk about optimizing all these steps, when we talk about automating with the help of some scripts, we write some scripts or our YAML scripts, with the help of which we automate the entire process. And this automation is called CICD. CICD is made up of two words, continuous integration, continuous delivery, which are the name of the automation of different steps. CICD consists of two steps. First of all, continuous integration, in which we automate the build and test steps of our development lifecycle. when we automate both of these, we call that process continuous integration. And when we automate our release or deployment step, we call it continuous delivery. Delivery means delivering the application to the users. Now here is another word that we get to hear many times, which is continuous deployment. continuous delivery and continuous deployment are synonyms. There is a very small difference between them. Let's suppose we deploy the application in a staging environment. Generally, before deploying on production, a manual step is involved in continuous delivery. Manual step means that the deployment will be automatic until the staging. But the leader of our team will have to come and approve that all the changes are correct. And after that, the automatic deployment will start on production. wherever this manual step gets involved, we say that we are using continuous delivery, which is the most common way to implement CI-CD. But sometimes, once the automatic deployment is done on the organization, then without any manual approval, automatic deployment is done on production. there we are using continuous deployment in CI-CD. whenever we listen to the CD, it depends on the implementation of the organization, whether we are using continuous delivery or continuous deployment. to summarize, CI-CD is the automation that triggers with every code change and then performs. Where continuous integration ends, continuous delivery starts. Now we have understood what CI-CD is, it is the name of automating all these processes. But why exactly do we need this automation? Let's understand what were the problems in the manual process. , this is the whole process that we have discussed. Where the application is developing, we are committing changes, we are pushing, the build is getting prepared, the tests are being performed, and then we are releasing the application and deploying it. finally, in prod, our entire e-commerce application is available. Now if we had done all these things manually, then what problems would we have? The first and most classical problem is that in any organization, there are multiple developers who work on common applications or common features. if all this work was done manually, then generally all the developers who have to commit their changes, they commit them on their own branch. , generally in any organization, there is a main branch that exists and every developer is committing changes in their own branch. Now after committing these changes, there will be a point when we will be required to integrate these changes. our changes will be integrated, in such an organization, there can be another developer whose changes will also be integrated. Whenever we merge the code of different developers, there can be conflicts and other issues. And when we will be manually resolving these issues, then we will give rise to a problem called integration hell. In which it will take us a lot of time and there will be many errors that we will get rid of. Now let's suppose we have integrated manually, but still we have to freeze our code base because we now need to test this application manually before integrating any new changes. And the same problems will come in manual testing that this is error prone and time consuming. When we talk about testing, there are a lot of tests that are performed on any application. if we talk about basic unit testing, then in any organization, there are hundreds of unit tests for a feature that can be written. And if we do this whole thing manually, then there will be a situation that our e-commerce application is being used by users, but at that time users are discovering our bugs that our team could not discover. Plus, we will get another problem which is of infrequent release. Because there is a code freeze, manual testing and manual deployment will take time, we will not be able to give new releases to users very soon. Plus, if our release and deployment process is also manual, then there can be a common problem here too that if there is an error during production and deployment, and let's suppose we have to go back to the previous version, then the process of restoring the backup is also manual, which will take a lot of time in itself. our application, unless we restore the backup, either users will encounter a lot of bugs or our application will be down, no one will be able to use it. And because of all these problems, before CICD, the situation was such that on Friday, weekends, in the evening, no deployment was generally at production level. Because if anything breaks, there will be no developer available in the office to fix those things. in this way, what did CICD do? It eradicated these problems and made the whole process simple. whenever the manual process was done, things were time consuming and error prone, then we get reliability and speed in the entire process because of CICD. what happened after CICD came? Because of continuous integration, build and test automated, which means that now if a developer commits a change on his local branch, then there will be a test to see if all the tests are being cleared. And this is the work that is generally performed on every single commit. when we integrate our code, this code is already working for all the test cases. And the same testing will be done for our other developers at every commit. And if the tests fail at any step in continuous integration, then the developer can go and check what error came in the code, they can fix that code, they can recommit the changes and integrate it with the main branch. this is the importance of continuous integration. And the significance of continuous delivery is that if we have to deploy 5 new features on prod in a single day, then that is completely possible because everything is working in an automated manner. Now how do we implement CICD pipelines? , we have to write automation scripts for that. For example, if we take the example of GitHub Actions, which is a very popular tool to implement CICD pipelines, then we have to write YAML files. .yaml, which stands for Yet Another Markup Language, in that we have to write some instructions. this is an example of a script that builds and tests the code of Node.js. because of that script, if we push any new change in our branch, then a workflow will start for us. The commands and instructions that we wrote in the script will start running one by one. And we can go there and check every step. And if all of the tests successfully pass, we have taken the example of two tests, if they passed, then we will get a green tick, which means that the automation was successful. But if the tests fail anywhere, then we can go to the exact step and see what exactly the issue is, which tests have failed, and then we can make the appropriate changes in the code. this is a very simple way of implementing CICD pipelines. Now how do we set up CICD pipelines exactly? For that, we have multiple tools which are available to us. We have GitHub Actions, Jenkins, CircleCI, TravisCI, GitLab CI, CID, Bamboo, and along with that, there are many other tools available in the industry. Now generally, which tool should we learn from these? It depends heavily on which organization we are working in, because generally we will work on the same tool that is used in our organization. But the two most popular tools in these are GitHub Actions and Jenkins. If we talk about GitHub Actions, then GitHub Actions is very popular. It was released in 2019 and it is native to GitHub. Meaning if our code base has already been set up in any of our organizations on GitHub, then using GitHub Actions to set up our CICD pipeline is going to be very, very easy. I personally find GitHub Actions to be very intuitive to set up our own CICD. Along with that, we also have Jenkins, which is fairly old. It was released in 2011. And Jenkins is a jobs orchestrator, which has a lot of easy customizations available. Many companies that started in 2019, they were using Jenkins for their CICD. Meaning it is one of the most popular tools to set up a CICD setup, but it is also slightly harder to maintain. That is why after the release of GitHub Actions, there were some organizations which shifted from Jenkins to GitHub Actions. If you ask about my recommendation, then I would personally suggest you to start with GitHub Actions if we are setting up CICD for the first time. Because we are already using tools GitHub, it will be more intuitive and easy for us. Continuous delivery, continuous deployment are very related terms. it is very important to understand the exact difference between these two terms in CICD. , once we have built our code base, after building it, we have tested it, now our code is ready to be deployed. this process comes under our continuous integration. After that, generally what we do is we deploy our application on the staging environment. This is the process in majority organizations that we follow. We deploy our code on staging and after staging, there are generally some end-to-end tests that we perform. compliance, performance and security tests. After all the tests are successful, we generally get manual approval from a manager or from a team lead. After which we deploy it on production. this whole process is called continuous delivery because it involves manual approval. But in the same process, if we remove the manual approval, let's copy it, if we remove the manual approval here, and the entire flow, if it works in an automated manner, that automatically after our test is successful, there is no manual approval. Automatically the prod is deployed. this type of deployment is called continuous deployment, in which there is no manual approval required. depending upon the strategy that is followed in our company for deployment, we have continuous delivery and continuous deployment. Generally, continuous delivery follows in majority organizations. these two also have their own use cases. For example, if we have very sensitive data, if we are building a banking application or a fintech application, where we literally have the financial records of people, then we will not let any new change go without manual approval. Generally, continuous delivery will be better suited. But let's suppose if we are building an application Netflix or Hotstar, where the majority changes will not deal with very sensitive data, and in such an organization, if there is a well-established DevOps team, then we can follow continuous deployment too. this is the basic difference between the two. Once we have built our application, tested it, and deployed it, then it is possible that after many tests, there is a bug that has reached the production level, has reached the users. In such cases, we have different deployment strategies with our CI-CD which we use that we have almost zero downtime. that we never have a situation where the users either have to use the buggy application or our application is completely down, it is not available to the users. to avoid this situation, we have different strategies. One of which is a very common strategy, blue-green deployment. Blue-green deployment strategy says that we will create two identical but separate environments for our application. The first environment is our blue environment, which holds the current version of the application. And the second environment is the green environment, which holds the new version of the application. we can understand it this, if the current version is version 3 and we want to move to version 4, then we will keep both versions of both in separate environments. Now, all the traffic that was coming to our application originally on version 3, we will redirect all that traffic to version 4. all the users have now moved to version 4. And the benefit we will get from this is that in version 4, if something goes wrong, then we can redirect all the traffic back to the previous version. switching back to the previous version becomes very easy. Along with this, we have other deployment strategies. For example, we have canary deployment. In canary deployment, what we do is that we do not redirect all our traffic to the new version. Initially, we redirect a little traffic to our new version. For example, if we have 100 users, then we will redirect 5-10% of the users to the new version for 1-2 hours. And if everything is working fine, then we will redirect more users. And this way, we will gradually redirect our number of users to the new version. And then there will come a point where all the users will be using our new application. in case if there is a problem, if the users face a problem on the new app, then we can redirect them back to the old version. Now there is also another deployment strategy, which is called rolling deployment. In rolling deployment, we have a single environment that we maintain. But generally, we have a single environment that we maintain. But generally, we have a load balancer in any organization, which is connected to different instances. our requests are forwarded to different multiple server instances. what we do is that initially, it can be a single instance or a group of instances on which we deploy our new version. And on the rest of the instances, our old version is deployed. we can test for some particular users on a particular instance that our new version is working well. And if things are going well, then we start deploying our new version in other instances. this is how we can use different deployment strategies along with CI-CD. Now CI-CD is something that if we use it with scalable applications or large teams, then it makes our work more simple. In fact, when we integrate tools Docker and Kubernetes with this whole flow, then it makes our work much easier in large organizations. on our college YouTube, we also have a dedicated Docker tutorial that we can learn from. I hope that from today's session, we have understood in detail what exactly is CI-CD, what is its role, why we need CI-CD, what are the different tools in the industry and what are the different deployment strategies that we can use. if you want another session on any DevOps concept, you can let me know in the comments. That's all for today. See you in the next session. Till then, keep learning and keep exploring.