तद्लोक, तद्लोक is what if two and more processes are waiting on happening of some event but that event doesn't happen, that is called the deadlock and those two processes are in the deadlock state means if we understand it from a simple example, then let's say तब आप बानक बआग बानक मेंगे आप बानक परस्शनल से बोल्रूग, के आप बानक बावग नहीं, बढ़क तब परस्शनी सेझे की फ़ूँ थी दिपोसेद दिस मीनिमाम आबावगड, देन वी भी लोपन दे अखाऊन, बबढ़न रहा है एक बोल्रूग, यक बावगड की पहले में आखाऊन तो और अखाऊन, after that if I want, I can submit the money, बढ़ थ यान की वहड की बढ़ की यह ता होँ, कि बढ़़ तब रहा है, भी आप बावगड परस्शनल क्या रहे है, की पहले आप मनी दिपोज़ट करो हमारे पस, then we will open the account. तो बोछतार वेटिंग आपनीग आप सम्विवैंट, बटो वो वियाए आखकर नहीं होगा, that is what the deadlock situation. तो तो तो विवाए एक समपल कि देराने था, there are two cars A and B, two drivers are driving that car. A is saying that I am on the direction, he is moving towards this direction. And at the same time some B person that is also moving towards A. let's say B is moving wrong side. it happens in India normally, as A, I feel yes I am going in my direction but B is also thinking that my direction is also this. what will happen in this situation? Both are waiting for some event. What is the event? A is saying that I have to go in this direction towards this direction. B is saying that I have to go in this direction but how will I go? Either I have to back one car or I have to back B's car. But why will I do it? Ego is also something. that's why neither A will remove the car nor B will remove it. that is what a kind of deadlock situation. both of them are stuck here. This situation is known as deadlock situation. Or we should talk in a technical way, in synchronization. In synchronization also we had talked about deadlock. there are two semaphores S1 and S2. There is one process, that process needs two semaphores S1 and S2. And there is one more process P2, that needs S2 and S1. let's say P1 has taken the semaphore S and waiting for S2. And P2 is having the semaphore S2 and waiting for S1. that is what again called a deadlock situation. Because P1 got one semaphore S1 but didn't get S2. Why didn't get S2? Maybe because of sleep, it may be that I got pre-empt. P2 got S2 but as soon as I got S1, it also got sleep. Means again control with P1. P1 is sitting with S1 and saying that I want S2. P2 is sitting with S2 and saying that I want S1. both are waiting on happening of some event. What is the event that P1 gets S2 and P2 gets S1. But it didn't get it. Because P1 has downed S1, P2 has downed S2. Both are in the blocked state. Now who will unblock them? No one. That is called the deadlock situation. If we see from simple examples there is a resource. Resource R1 and R2, two resources, two processes P1 and P2. Let's say that R1 is allocated to P1. This line is showing that P1 has taken R1 and P1 is saying that I need R2 because P1 is requesting for the R2. And R2 is held by P2 means R2 is sitting with P2 and P2 is saying I need R2. this situation is what? This situation is a kind of deadlock. It is not exactly a deadlock. Now we cannot call it deadlock. Why cannot we call it deadlock? You will get it clear. Here we are saying that P1 is taking one resource with R1. P1 is using R1 but he is saying that I will get execute if I get R2. P1 is saying I am having R2 but please give me R2. If you give R2 to me then I will get execute but R2 is already taken by P2. R2 is already taken by P2. This is R2 is already taken by P2. Or P2 is also saying I will get execute but just give me R1 because it is requesting for R1. But you will not get it because P1 will not execute. P1 will execute when? When it will get R2 and it is sitting with R1 but when R2 gets executed. And when P2 will get executed when it will get R1 but it will not get R1 because R1 is sitting with P1. And P1 will not get R2 because it is holding with P2. this is what a kind of deadlock situation. But this cannot be called deadlock because for deadlock there are four necessary conditions. The conditions are Mutual exclusion No preemption Hold and wait And circular wait These four are necessary conditions for the deadlock. These four are necessary conditions These four are necessary conditions for the deadlock. What is the first condition? Mutual exclusion. Mutual exclusion means whatever resource you are using in the scenario that resource must be used in a mutual exclusive way. Means it is not possible to use that resource more than one process at the same time. a printer. if a process is using a printer. Means a process is using a printer and printing something. And at the same time another process is coming. P1, the first process will not be preempt. Means it will not stop there. It will stop there. It is not P2 is doing his job in between. Means P2's page is also printing. P1's process is also printing. Both are printing at the same time. No. This should not be there. Means this is a necessary condition. If any of these four conditions are not true, then there will be a chance that the deadlock is not there. that is why what is the mutual exclusion? Mutual exclusion is whatever the resources you are using, all the resources must be used by all the processes in an exclusive manner. Means one by one. Interleaving is not allowed. Interleaving is not allowed. Second, no preemption. No preemption means , R1 is using P1. R1 is allocated to P1. And P1 is saying I need R2. And P2 is saying I need R1. preemption is not there. Preemption means, asa now ki one process is holding some resource and a second process came and we preempted the previous process. That release your resources. No. Preemption will not be there. Means there is no priority system here. That if there is high priority, then low priority. We are talking about equal priority here. that is why preemption will not be there. One process which is holding will not hold till it is not executed. It will not preempt. Means its switching will not be there. Third one is hold and wait. Hold and wait is what? This is a situation of hold and wait also. Hold and wait means P1 is holding one resource that is R1. And waiting for R2. And P2 is holding one resource that is R2. And waiting for R1. This is the hold and wait. Asa now ki P1 is saying that I need R2 and it releases the R1. Means whatever it holds and sits, it releases it. No. Whatever it is already holds it, that must be with the P1 and it can request for more resources. that means one resource or two resources whatever P1 is holding, it will hold them and waiting for the another resources. Which it does not have. Fourth one is circular wait. Circular wait means this is what? A kind of circle. This is what? A kind of circle. Circle means there is a loop in this. If there is a loop here, then definitely here there can be a deadlock situation. Even now I am saying that it can be because 4 conditions are very important. Time 4 conditions ke baad hi, me decide kr sikthau ki deadlock hai ya? No. Let's see one more example of circular wait. Let's say that there is a process P1 which is holding some resource R1. This arrow means if this arrow towards the process is coming, it is called hold. Means that process is holding that resource. Means it is allocated. R1 is allocated to P1 process and there is a process P2 which is saying I need R1. I need R1. Need means I am requesting for R1. Request ke li am resource ke towards. Resource ke taraf am arrow draw karthe. And P2 is holding some resource R2. P2 is requesting R1 and holding R2. And let's say there is another process P3 which is requesting for R2 and it is holding R3. Means R3 ko hold kiya hua and requesting for R2. And P1 which is holding R1, it is requesting for resource R3. It is requesting for resource R3. let's see kiya hua circular wait. Means this P3 is having R3 waiting for R2. P2 is having R2 waiting for R1. P1 is having R1 waiting for R3. this is what a kind of circular wait. Yaha pe ek loop aaya. these 4 conditions are necessity conditions. Inko hua bolte necessity and sufficient conditions to become a deadlock situation. To ake li ye ek situation ni mutual exclusion, no preemption, hold and wait. Circular wait akar chaaro necessary conditions hai, then we can say deadlock akar. To isli ye chaaro conditions jo ya bohot important hai. This is a simple explanation of ki what is a deadlock and what are the conditions of the deadlock. Thank you.